README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jembi/openhim.png?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/jembi/openhim)

OpenHIM
=======

OpenHIM is an open source Health Information Mediator built to facilitate interoperability between disparate Health Information Systems.

It was developed for the Rwandan Health Infromation Exchange however, it was designed and intended to be used in re-used other settings. For more details about how the OpenHIM is used in the Rwandan Health Information exchange, see https://jembiprojects.jira.com/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=10289633

Setup
=====

The HIM is developed as a Mule ESB application so we need MuleStudio to work with the project. You can download it here: http://www.mulesoft.org/download-mule-esb-community-edition. If you are new to MuleStudio I would suggest going over some of the getting started documentation and do some of the tutorials: http://www.mulesoft.org/documentation/display/MULE3START/Home.

Next, you will want to import this git repo into MuleStudio. There is some good documentation on how to accomblish this on the Mule wiki: http://www.mulesoft.org/documentation/display/MULE3STUDIO/Using+Git+with+Studio

Once, you have the application imported you will need to configure 2 things for the HIM to function.

1.	a MySQL database - this is used to store and log transactions that flow through the OpenHIM
2.	an OpenLDAP server - this is used for client authentication with the OpenHIM

Database setup
--------------

1.	Install MySQL for your platform. In Ubuntu you can do this as follows: `$apt-get install mysql-server`
2.	Locate the create_database.sql script in the HIM built in src/main/resources.
3.	Execute this sql script using mysql and it will create the database required for the RHEA HIM `$mysql -u root -p"<root_pwd>" < create_database.sql`
4.	Create a new user for the database and grant access to them. Log into the mysql console: `$mysql -u -p"<root_pwd>"`
5.	Then run: `grant all on interoperability_layer.* to 'himuser'@localhost identified by '<user_pwd>';`
6.	Locate the HIM-core.properties file in /src/main/resources. Edit this file to contain the details of a mysql user (created above) that can read and write to the created database.

OpenLDAP setup
--------------

See https://help.ubuntu.com/12.04/serverguide/openldap-server.html for the source of alot of this material.

1.	Edit /etc/hosts and replace the domain name with one that will give you the suffix you desire. First backup the original file: `$cp hosts hosts.bak`
2.	Edit hosts file and change the 127.0.1.1 line to: "127.0.1.1          <hostname>.moh.gov.rw           <hostname>" Note: <hostname> must be the hostname of your machine, run the following command to find it out: `$hostname`
3.	Install OpenLDAP `$sudo apt-get install slapd ldap-utils`
4.	Revert /etc/hosts back to normal `$cp hosts.bak hosts`
5.	Test if the ldap server was setup and the default database was created correctly. Run the following command: `$ldapsearch -x -LLL -H ldap:/// -b dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw dn` You should see the following 2 line:
	dn: dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw
	dn: cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw
	If you see this the database was setup correctly!
6.	Now we need to add some user to the LDAP server to do this you need to import a .ldif file. A testing ldif file comes packaged with the HIM source code. To import the LDIF file run: `$ldapadd -c -x -D cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw -W -f ldap-auth-pre-prod.ldif`
7.	To do a test search of the ldap database run: `$ldapsearch -x -LLL -b dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw 'uid=test'`. If the result of the search shows up positive you are set to go!

Note: when creating your own ldap database of users have to be in OrganizationalUnit called himusers

How to change a users password: `$ldappasswd -D "cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw" -W -S "uid=test,ou=himusers,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw"`

How to run the application
--------------------------

1.	In the openhim Mule application locate the mule-project.xml file.
2.	Right click on and it and choose 'run as', then choose 'Mule Application'.
3.	The app will start up and run in the eclipse console, hey presto!

Building the OpenHIM from the command line
------------------------------------------

The OpenHIM can be built using maven. This will run the unit tests and also ouput a zip package that you can load into a standalone mule server.

`mvn clean install`

Running the Mock Services
-------------------------

Ok, so the OpenHIM doesn't do much without services to orchestration. The current OpenHIM is setup to work with the services in the Rwandan Health Information Exchange. However, we have also created some mock services that the OpenHIM setup to use by default. These can be found here: https://github.com/jembi/rhea-mock-services. These services are also built as a mule app an can be imported and run the same way.

Testing the RHEA HIM
--------------------

To test the RHEA HIM implementation you can use SOAP UI (http://www.soapui.org/)

A soapUI project that is setup for testing the API calls for the HIM can be found here: https://github.com/jembi/rhea-api-tests

By default the OpenHIM run on port 5000 so make sure to set the endpoint in soapUI to point to https://localhost:5000. You must supply a HTTP basic auth username and password to connect to the OpenHIM. the details must be equal to one of the user in the LDAP databse. If you used the ldif provied you can use the following details:
* Username: test
* Passowrd: test

Commit message:

Added link to OpenHIM wiki

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jembi/openhim.png?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/jembi/openhim)

OpenHIM
=======

OpenHIM is an open source Health Information Mediator built to facilitate interoperability between disparate Health Information Systems.

It was developed for the Rwandan Health Infromation Exchange however, it was designed and intended to be used in re-used other settings. For more details about how the OpenHIM is used in the Rwandan Health Information exchange, see https://jembiprojects.jira.com/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=10289633

For additional information and documentation please see the [OpenHIM wiki pages](https://github.com/jembi/openhim/wiki).

Setup
=====

The HIM is developed as a Mule ESB application so we need MuleStudio to work with the project. You can download it here: http://www.mulesoft.org/download-mule-esb-community-edition. If you are new to MuleStudio I would suggest going over some of the getting started documentation and do some of the tutorials: http://www.mulesoft.org/documentation/display/MULE3START/Home.

Next, you will want to import this git repo into MuleStudio. There is some good documentation on how to accomblish this on the Mule wiki: http://www.mulesoft.org/documentation/display/MULE3STUDIO/Using+Git+with+Studio

Once, you have the application imported you will need to configure 2 things for the HIM to function.

1.	a MySQL database - this is used to store and log transactions that flow through the OpenHIM
2.	an OpenLDAP server - this is used for client authentication with the OpenHIM

Database setup
--------------

1.	Install MySQL for your platform. In Ubuntu you can do this as follows: `$apt-get install mysql-server`
2.	Locate the create_database.sql script in the HIM built in src/main/resources.
3.	Execute this sql script using mysql and it will create the database required for the RHEA HIM `$mysql -u root -p"<root_pwd>" < create_database.sql`
4.	Create a new user for the database and grant access to them. Log into the mysql console: `$mysql -u -p"<root_pwd>"`
5.	Then run: `grant all on interoperability_layer.* to 'himuser'@localhost identified by '<user_pwd>';`
6.	Locate the HIM-core.properties file in /src/main/resources. Edit this file to contain the details of a mysql user (created above) that can read and write to the created database.

OpenLDAP setup
--------------

See https://help.ubuntu.com/12.04/serverguide/openldap-server.html for the source of alot of this material.

1.	Edit /etc/hosts and replace the domain name with one that will give you the suffix you desire. First backup the original file: `$cp hosts hosts.bak`
2.	Edit hosts file and change the 127.0.1.1 line to: "127.0.1.1          <hostname>.moh.gov.rw           <hostname>" Note: <hostname> must be the hostname of your machine, run the following command to find it out: `$hostname`
3.	Install OpenLDAP `$sudo apt-get install slapd ldap-utils`
4.	Revert /etc/hosts back to normal `$cp hosts.bak hosts`
5.	Test if the ldap server was setup and the default database was created correctly. Run the following command: `$ldapsearch -x -LLL -H ldap:/// -b dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw dn` You should see the following 2 line:
	dn: dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw
	dn: cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw
	If you see this the database was setup correctly!
6.	Now we need to add some user to the LDAP server to do this you need to import a .ldif file. A testing ldif file comes packaged with the HIM source code. To import the LDIF file run: `$ldapadd -c -x -D cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw -W -f ldap-auth-pre-prod.ldif`
7.	To do a test search of the ldap database run: `$ldapsearch -x -LLL -b dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw 'uid=test'`. If the result of the search shows up positive you are set to go!

Note: when creating your own ldap database of users have to be in OrganizationalUnit called himusers

How to change a users password: `$ldappasswd -D "cn=admin,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw" -W -S "uid=test,ou=himusers,dc=moh,dc=gov,dc=rw"`

How to run the application
--------------------------

1.	In the openhim Mule application locate the mule-project.xml file.
2.	Right click on and it and choose 'run as', then choose 'Mule Application'.
3.	The app will start up and run in the eclipse console, hey presto!

Building the OpenHIM from the command line
------------------------------------------

The OpenHIM can be built using maven. This will run the unit tests and also ouput a zip package that you can load into a standalone mule server.

`mvn clean install`

Running the Mock Services
-------------------------

Ok, so the OpenHIM doesn't do much without services to orchestration. The current OpenHIM is setup to work with the services in the Rwandan Health Information Exchange. However, we have also created some mock services that the OpenHIM setup to use by default. These can be found here: https://github.com/jembi/rhea-mock-services. These services are also built as a mule app an can be imported and run the same way.

Testing the RHEA HIM
--------------------

To test the RHEA HIM implementation you can use SOAP UI (http://www.soapui.org/)

A soapUI project that is setup for testing the API calls for the HIM can be found here: https://github.com/jembi/rhea-api-tests

By default the OpenHIM run on port 5000 so make sure to set the endpoint in soapUI to point to https://localhost:5000. You must supply a HTTP basic auth username and password to connect to the OpenHIM. the details must be equal to one of the user in the LDAP databse. If you used the ldif provied you can use the following details:
* Username: test
* Passowrd: test
